## @obruchez (2014-11-22)

https://twitter.com/avernet/status/530579042219880448

I'm not sure there is much (ontological) disagreement between you and me. What I see, mainly, are different sensitivities. We both agree that the universe is deterministic, with a pinch of quantum randomness for good measure.

You seem to hold a more positive perspective on determinism than me. The realization that the universe is deterministic came to me as a depressing shock ([we already discussed this](https://github.com/obruchez/public/blob/master/Twitter/Reply%20to%20%40avernet%20(2014-01-20).md)). For some reason that I don't yet understand, you never went through such a phase.

We also seem to have different reactions towards the *many* existing definitions of "free will". How many are there? 10? 50? 100? See [Jerry Coyne's post](http://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2014/11/20/another-unconvincing-redefinition-of-free-will/) about this problem. My reaction is to say that the concept is corrupted, useless, and that we should use other, more meaningful words to talk about reality. Your reaction seems to be: "No problem, I can keep using these words, as long as I give *my* definition first." Which reminds be of this [xkcd strip](https://xkcd.com/927/)... :)

Now, I don't agree with a couple of things.

*  "These two perspectives seem irreconcilable". I don't see why they would be irreconcilable. I cannot speak for Sam Harris, Daniel Miessler, or Jerry Coyne, but am I allowed to say they're both 50% (or so) interesting and useful? Most people are wrong (since they believe in a mystical/dualistic/libertarian free will) and understanding how people think, what their biases are (i.e. why they are wrong), etc. is useful. If you don't understand how they came to the incorrect conclusion, how can you even try to convince them that the "compatibilist free will" is worth understanding and studying? Explaining the phenomena itself (you call it "free will", I call it "feeling/illusion of free will" or "sense of agency" or anything you like - this is just semantics, after all) is also an interesting problem for neuroscience. There are probably evolutionary explanations for this feeling and we should find them. Also, ultimately, I think the problem of explaining this "sense of agency" is closely linked with explaining consciousness, which is another huge challenge for neuroscience.

* I'm a hard determinist and I don't conclude that choices and freedom don't exist. A choice is just the conscious reduction of different alternatives to a single option (or something like that). And freedom, well, is always constrained, so is the glass half-full or half-empty? You can almost always argue that something is free and not free at the same time. It's just semantics, again. Can you point me to posts where Jerry Coyne or Daniel Miessler, for example, suggest that choices and freedom don't exist? I know Sam Harris tends to play with words, something you really don't like, so I can see him say that choices/freedom don't really exist. I don't have a problem with that. I can read between the lines. :)

Also, I would be interested in your opinion about several points.

* You say that the compatibilist approach is more interesting (to you). But have we really learnt anything new from it, in your opinion? What can we learn from Daniel Dennett's work/books? In what sense is compatibilism not like theology ([Jerry Coyne's deliberately provocative opinion](http://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2014/11/20/another-unconvincing-redefinition-of-free-will/)?)

* Do you agree with compatibilists who think that society needs to believe in free will to behave morally? Daniel Dennett seems to hold this view: ["Dan, at least, has explicitly said that if people don’t think they have free will, society would be endangered."](http://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2014/02/13/sam-harris-vs-dan-dennett-on-free-will/). Couldn't we say the same about God?

Anyway, at this point, I'm more interested in the meta-debate of free will. Why do determinists such as you and me come to a hard determinist or a compatibilist/determinist position? What about this "Determinism Shock" (DS) I was talking about? Is it common? Why do [scientists seem to favor a hard determinist position](http://whyevolutionistrue.wordpress.com/2014/04/01/is-dennett-rethinking-free-will/), while [philosophers seem to favor a compatibilist position](http://philpapers.org/archive/BOUWDP)? Why does Daniel Dennett seem to be so close to stopping using the term "free will" (["I am beginning to appreciate the benefits of discarding the term “free will” altogether"](http://www.methodejournal.org/index.php?journal=meth&page=article&op=view&path%5B%5D=67&path%5B%5D=65)) but won't do it? Is free will a kind of religious issue among naturalists (with the Daniel Dennett Church on one side and the Sam Harris Church on the other side)? :)
