## @obruchez (2014-11-06)

https://twitter.com/avernet/status/519727733950017536

"Let's assume, for argument's sake, that we're talking of magic as it can be performed by illusionists for entertainment. (This with the understanding that the same has been used for reasons other than entertainment through the ages.) There are 2 parts to this "magic": what can be observed when it is performed, and the explanation we give to what we saw. There is little disagreement about the experiential part of it, while the explanation can be natural (trick) or supernatural. Does "magic" refer to the phenomenon we observe, or to the explanation we give thereof? The term can mean either or both. Over the centuries we humans find more natural explanations to phenomenons that were earlier seen as supernatural. But does it mean that every time we need to find a new word to refer to the phenomenon? Dennett took the example of the "sunset" (or was it sunrise?), but examples abound. At most, I'd agree to use a qualifier, to reassure the reader I'm sane, i.e. a naturalist."

If examples abound, out of curiosity, could you just cite a couple of them? The sun example is not innocent. Heliocentrism is one of the major scientific revolutions. And there aren't too many scientific revolutions of that significance. A few come to mind: the theory of evolution by natural selection, materialism (in the context of philosophy of mind), etc.

[I've already explained](https://github.com/obruchez/public/blob/master/Twitter/Reply%20to%20%40avernet%20(2014-03-21).md) why the sunset metaphor is shaky. I'll just add that the *huge* difference between the movement of the sun and free will is that nowadays, four centuries after Galileo, it's pretty clear to everybody (or almost everybody, I guess?) that the Earth is going around the Sun and that the Earth is not the center of the universe. In that context, we can safely use such poetic/metaphorical words as "sunrise" or "sunset". No confusion here. No harm done.

With magic, it's slightly different. When you see a David Copperfield show (on TV, in a theater, etc.), the context is pretty clear. No need for special words, I agree. The huge difference with the movement of the sun is that you still have 80-90% (I guess, again) of the world population who believes in the existence of non-naturalistic, supernatural magic in one form or the other. And that's why "illusion", "prestidigitation", etc. are widely used words. There's a need for them. But when you see "David Copperfield" and "magic" in the same sentence, it's pretty clear what we're talking about. 

So, back to free will and that's where there might still be a real disagreement between you and me (i.e. not a semantic disagreement). How many people believe or understand the universe is deterministic? My guess: not much. How many people believe in libertarian free will. My guess: many. That context is completely different than the Sun/Earth context. There's way more confusion. It might be obvious to me or people that know you that you're a naturalist, but remember that most people are not naturalists (89% of the Swiss population believes in God!). In *that* context, using the words "free will" instead of "compatibilist free will" or, better, "sense of agency" is really misleading and not helpful.
